It's going to be OK.

Before you open up this unit, take the precaution to realize that this thing is
a relic. It's a relic of the time and there is more ways to ruin it than may
seem apparent. Physically and mechanically there are easy ways to ruin this
unit. Electrically there are many ways to ruin this unit. Be careful and
cautious. This is a piece of history!

***** Let's take these precautions: *****

First, when the unit is upright, using your camera, take a picture of the
location, color, and type of knob and button across the entire control area.
Then, write down on a peice of paper that information.

"From left to right, knob color X, knob color Y, button color Z, button color
R, etc.."

So if there's ever a problem with the photos, you can refer to your notes. (In
facttake notes about everything you do when you work on this unit. They can be
invaluable later as you try to re-assemble the unit.)

***** Watch the Bender *****

The bender lever is unique. It's attached inside rather delicately, so the
danger is when you flip the unit over to take the bottom cover off, if the
setup is not padded well you may accidently push down on the actual lever
against a hard surface. That will likely break the plastic mount inside the
unit that holds the bender lever in place. Fixing that is not simple (possible
but not simple).

After taking your notes and pictures of where knobs and slider buttons are, now
we need to make a padded area for the unit to sit. Get some foam, thick towels,
etc.. and lay the control side of the unit down but mind where the bender lever
is. DO NOT REST THE UNIT HARD AGAINST THE BENDER LEVER. If the tip of the lever
is in contact with your work surface, add more padding to raise it up. I cannot
stress this enough. It's as irreplaceable as your first child. Do you love your
first child? Then treat the bender lever with as much respect.

Same could be said for the switches in the Bender area as well. They may not
seem proud enough to make contact with the

***** General Advice for Removing Boards on SH-101 *****

Remove all the boards from the SH-101 to work on it correctly. There's no real
easy way to work on the unit without all of the boards removed. It'll just be
more convenient for a full diagnostic check of everything on the unit.

After removing the bottom metal cover (remove the perimter screws first, they
are probably Phillips head. They have a coarse pitch - they are meant to drive
into a plastic post inside the unit. Be gentle.

After removing the permiter screws (and putting them in a container to keep
track of them) then there will be 4 (if I remember correctly) interior screws
on the bottom cover plate that are machine screws. They connect the cover to
the keyboard bed assembly. They are tapped for the threads on the sheet metal
assembly inside. Gently remove them. Keep them organized.

You can now remove the bottom cover.

Inside there are a few areas where boards are mounted. For orientation, we're
going to refer to the system with the back cover off, and the keyboard bed to
the "south". To the "north" of the keyboard bed is the pair of long control and
synth boards.

   1. The main board and the synth board are stacked on each other connected by
      multiple ribbon cables. The wire in the ribbon cables are solid core, not
      stranded. They are not mounted on headers, they are soldered directly to
      the boards. We'll talk about removing them last.
   2. The bender board (south east corner) is routed to the main board via
      cable harnesses. Those harnesses do fit into socket headers. You could
      remove the harnesses from the main board. The harnesses that mount onto
      0.100" connectors are plastic fittings with a plastic lock tab. Do not
      pry the lock tab. The lock tab is thin plastic and if you work on it too
      firmly it'll break off. Slip a very thin flat precision screw driver
      between the header and the plug to lift it off the header slightly. Work
      both ends and it will be possible to hand-wiggle it off. The bender
      potentiometer is mounted inside the unit with coarse thread screws into
      plastic posts inside. Loosen them and remove the bender potentiometer
      assembly from the case, but do not remove the harness for it. Keep it all
      together.
   3. The power supply / Audio Output card is snapped in to the plastic case.
      No screw holds the board down, but the ground lug from the power supply
      board will have already been released when you took off the bottom cover.
      It will have two connectors to the main synth board. One is a two pin
      header near the north west corner of the main synth board. The other is a
      two-row (20 pin if I remember) header near the north east corner of the
      main synth board. That 20-pin header is very stiff to remove, so use the
      same advice as mentioned above about removing the harness from the board.
   4. There's a small I/O port board in the north east corner. That can pop out
      without any hassle.
   5. Now the main synth board. With masking tape, label each harness that is
      plugged into a header on the main synth board. Number them from left to
      right. Place the number on the masking tape, and tape onto the wire-
      harness. This will help you make sure you get it all connected back right
      and relieve your mind as to what should happen.
   6. Along the perimeter of the main synth board is a series of coarse
      threaded screws. Phillips head. Carefully loosen them. Don't press to
      hard, but hard enough to get purchase on the head to turn it. Make sure
      your screw driver is fitted correctly (not too big, not too small).
      Loosen and remove all of those screws. Save them together. The keyboard
      is connected by two wire harnesses. Disconnect the wire-harnesses for the
      keyboard FROM THE KEYBOARD side, not the synth board side.
   7. Gently lift the north side of the main synth board. It will "hinge" on
      the set of interconnecting ribbon cables soldered between the control
      board and the main synth board above it. Gendly hinge the main synth
      board up, lifting from the north side until the main synth board is
      vertical.
   8. Now you can access the screws holding the control board. They will be
      along the perimeter. They will be the same kind used for the main synth
      board. There may be a couple that are interior to the board, I cannot
      remember for sure. But loosen and remove them all. Store them aside.
   9. Now all of the boards are un-secured from the unit. Carefully lift the
      whole gangly set of boards, harnesses, etc.. UP and out of the main
      plastic case. Set this aside on a clean flat surface. If you need to you
      can slowly (SLOWLY) hinge the control board and main synth board further
      so that it is flattened. If the ribbon cables need to bend, bend them IN
      THE MIDDLE of the cable not near the point where they are soldered to the
      PCB. And by "Bend" I do not mean literally bending it sharply, but let
      the ribbon cable flex from the middle of the cable not near the solder
      points. Those are going to be your weak points and difficult to repair if
      you break off the wire to the PCB.
  10. Now you can remove the keyboard bed from the case. Set that aside in a
      safe place ( padded and out of the way from danger -- it's
      irreplaceable). You won't need it again until it's time to test any fixes
      to the system. The Roland SH-101 has capabilities to "play" without using
      the keyboard.

***** Prep the boards for re-work. *****

   1. The simplest thing to do here is to get some 1" stand-offs (4-40 thread).
      Place one stand-off male through a hole from the underside of the control
      and synth boards. On the component side of the boards, connect to the
      female end of another stand-off. This will give you a stable way of
      setting the boards on a work-surface to reach all the components and
      traces without damaging the existing components/traces. You'll need about
      20 or so pairs of these stand-offs. 6-32 will be too big, if I remember.
      Use 4-40 thread sized stand-offs. They can be aluminum or nylon, it won't
      matter. But nylon is preferred.
   2. The boards that will need stand-offs are: Bender board, main synth board,
      and the control board.
   3. The boards that do not have stand-offs will be the button bank board (did
      I remember to mention that above.. you'll see it anyway - it's just north
      of the keyboard bed) and the power/ audio jack board and external-handle
      input board-let. For those what I did was place a small piece of
      cardboard that fit the shape of each board under each board (contacting
      the solder pad side) and then with some strips of electrical tape
      (gently) fasten the board to the cardboard layer. This will keep the
      components/solder-pads from the boards from accidently making contact
      where they ought not. I even wrapped them into little plastic cocoons so
      that they were fully insulated from any contact from anything else -
      - except the pig-tail wire-harness sticking out.

***** Jig for working *****

I ended up strapping down all of the boards ( after preparing them as described
above) to another card-board or plexiglass wafer so that the whole thing could
be turned over or moved around to suit. You'll need to get access to both the
component (top) and solder pad (bottom) sides of the main synth and control
boards, so don't cover.

A picture should go here with how it might look. TBD


